I will, my lord.
You shall do marvellous wisely,good Reynaldo,
Before you visit him, to makeinquire Of his behavior.
My lord, I did intend it.
Marry, well said; very wellsaid.
Look you, sir, Inquire me firstwhat Danskers are in Paris;
And how, and who, what means,where they keep,
What company, at what expense;
and finding By thisencompassment
and drift of question That theydo know my son,
come you more nearer
Than your particular demandswill touch it:
Take you, as 'twere, somedistant knowledge of him;
As thus, "I know his father andhis friends
And in part him."
Do you mark this, Reynaldo?
Ay, very well, my lord.
"And in part him;" but you maysay, "not well.
"And if't be he I mean, he'svery wild;
Addicted, so and so."
And there put on him Whatforgeries you please;
marry, none so rank As maydishonour him;
take heed of that;
But, sir, such wanton, wild andusual slips
As are companions noted and mostknown
To youth and liberty.
As gaming, my lord.
Ay, or drinking, fencing,swearing, quarrelling,
Drabbing: you may go so far.
My lord, that would dishonourhim.
Faith, no; as you may season itin the charge.
But, my good lord--
Wherefore should you do this?
Ay, my lord, I would know that.
Marry, sir, here's my drift;
You laying these slight sullieson my son,
Your party in converse, him youwould sound,
Having ever seen in theprenominate crimes
The youth you breathe of guilty,
be assured He closes with you inthis consequence;
"Good sir," or so, or "friend,"or "gentleman,"
According to the phrase and theaddition Of man and country.
Very good, my lord.
And then, sir, does he this--hedoes--
what was I about to say?
By the mass, I was about to saysomething: where did I leave?
At "closes in the consequence,"at "friend or so"
and "gentleman."
At "closes in the consequence"?
Ay, marry; He closes thus:
"I know the gentleman; I saw himyesterday,"
or t' other day, Or then, orthen; with such,
or such; and, as you say,
There was a' gaming; thereo'ertook in's rouse;
There falling out at tennis: orperchance,
"I saw him enter such a house ofsale,"
Videlicet, a brothel, or soforth.
See you now;
Your bait of falsehood takesthis carp of truth:
And thus do we of wisdom and ofreach,
With windlasses and with assaysof bias,
By indirections find directionsout:
So by my former lecture andadvice, Shall you my son.
You have me, have you not?
My lord, I have.
God be wi' you; fare you well.
Good my lord!
Observe his inclination inyourself.
I shall, my lord.
And...
Let him ply his music.
Well, my lord.
Farewell!
How now, Ophelia!
What's the matter?
My lord, my lord, I've have beenso affrighted!
With what, i' the name of God?
My lord, as I was sewing in mycloset,
Lord Hamlet, with his doubletall unbraced;
No hat upon his head; hisstockings foul'd,
Ungarter'd, and down-gyved tohis ancle; Pale as his shirt;
his knees knocking each other;
And with a look so piteous inpurport
As if he had been loosed out ofhell To speak of horrors,
he comes before me.
Mad for thy love?
My lord, I do not know; Buttruly, I do fear it.
What said he?
He took me by the wrist and heldme hard;
Then goes he to the length ofall his arm;
And, with his other hand thuso'er his brow,
He falls to such perusal of myface As he would draw it.
Long stay'd he so;
At last, a little shaking ofmine arm
And thrice his head thus wavingup and down,
He raised a sigh so piteous andprofound
As it did seem to shatter allhis bulk And end his being.
That done, he lets me go:
And, with his head over hisshoulder turn'd,
He seem'd to find his waywithout his eyes;
For out o' doors he went withouttheir helps,
And, to the last, bended theirlight on me.
Oh, come.
Go with me: I will go seek theking.
This is the very ecstasy oflove.
What, have you given him anyhard words of late?
No, my good lord, but, as youdid command,
I did repel his letters anddenied His access to me.
That hath made him mad.
Oh, I'm sorry that with betterheed and judgment
I had not quoted him:
I fear'd he did but trifle Andmeant to wreck thee;
Oh, I'm sorry.
Go we to the king:
This must be known; which, beingkept close,
might move More grief to hidethan hate to utter love.
Welcome, dear Rosencrantz andGuildenstern!
Moreover that we much did longto see you,
The need we have to use you didprovoke Our hasty sending.
Something have you heard OfHamlet's transformation;
so I call it,
Sith nor the exterior nor theinward man
Resembles that it was.
What it should be, More than hisfather's death,
that thus hath put him
So much from the understandingof himself,
I cannot dream of: I entreat youboth,
That, being of so young daysbrought up with him,
And sith so neighbour'd to hisyouth and havior,
That you vouchsafe your resthere in our court
Some little time:
so by your companies To draw himon to pleasures,
and to gather, So much as fromoccasion you may glean,
Whether aught, to us unknown,afflicts him thus,
That, open'd, lies within ourremedy.
Good gentlemen, he hath muchtalk'd of you;
And sure I am two men there isnot living
To whom he more adheres.
Both your majesties Might,
by the sovereign power you haveof us,
Put your dread pleasures moreinto command Than to entreaty.
But we both obey, And here giveup ourselves,
in the full bent To lay ourservice freely at your feet,
To be commanded.
Thanks, Rosencrantz and gentleGuildenstern.
Thanks, Guildenstern and gentleRosencrantz:
And I beseech you instantly
to visit My too much changedson.
Heaven make our presence and ourpractises Pleasant
and helpful to him!
Ay.
Amen.
The ambassadors from Norway, Mygood lord,
Are joyfully return'd.
Thou still hast been the fatherof good news.
Have I, my lord?
I assure you, my good liege,
I hold my duty as I hold my soul
Both to my God and to mygracious king:
And I do think, or else thisbrain of mine
Hunts not the trail of policy sosure As it hath used to do,
that I have found The very cause
of Hamlet's lunacy.
O, speak of that; that do I longto hear.
Give first admittance to theambassadors;
My news shall be the fruit tothat great feast.
Thyself do grace to them, andbring them in.
He tells me, my dear Gertrude,
he hath found The head andsource
of all your son's distemper.
I doubt it is no other but themain;
His father's death and ouro'erhasty marriage.
Well, we shall sift him.
Welcome, my good friends!
Say, Voltemand, what from ourbrother Norway?
Most fair return of greetingsand desires.
Upon our first, he sent out tosuppress His nephew's levies;
which to him appear'd To be apreparation
'gainst the Polack; But, betterlook'd into,
he truly found It was againstyour highness:
whereat grieved,
That so his sickness, age andimpotence
Was falsely borne in hand, sendsout arrests On Fortinbras;
which he, in brief, obeys;
Receives rebuke from Norway,
and in fine Makes vow before hisuncle
never more To give the assay ofarms against your majesty.
Whereon old Norway, overcomewith joy,
Gives him three score thousandcrowns in annual fee,
And his commission to employthose soldiers,
So levied as before, against thePolack:
With an entreaty, herein furthershown,
That it might please you to givequiet pass
Through your dominions for thisenterprise,
On such regards of safety andallowance
As therein are set down.
It likes us well;
Go to your rest; at night we'llfeast together:
Most welcome home!
This business is well ended.
My liege, and madam,
to expostulate What majestyshould be,
what duty is, Why day is day,
night night, and time is time,
Were nothing but to waste night,day and time.
Therefore, since brevity is thesoul of wit
And tediousness the limbs andoutward flourishes,
I will be brief: your noble sonis mad.
Mad call I it; for, to definetrue madness,
What is't but to be nothing elsebut mad?
But let that go.
More matter, with less art.
Madam, I swear I use no art atall.
That he is mad, 'tis true: 'tistrue 'tis pity;
And pity 'tis 'tis true: afoolish figure;
But farewell it, for I will useno art.
Mad let us grant him, then:
and now remains That we find outthe cause of this effect,
Or rather say, the cause of thisdefect,
For this effect defective comesby cause:
Thus it remains, and theremainder thus.
Perpend.
I have a daughter-- have whileshe is mine--
Who, in her duty and obedience,mark,
Hath given me this: now gather,and surmise.
"To the celestial and my soul'sidol,
the most beautified Ophelia."
That's an ill phrase, a vilephrase;
"beautified" is a vile phrase:but you shall hear.
Thus: "In her excellent whitebosom, these"--et cetera.
Came this from Hamlet to her?
Good madam, stay awhile; I willbe faithful.
"Doubt thou the stars are fire;Doubt that the sun doth move;
"Doubt truth to be a liar; Butnever doubt I love.
"O dear Ophelia, I am ill atthese numbers;
"I have not art to reckon mygroans:
"but that I love thee best, Omore best, believe it.
"Adieu.
"Thine evermore most dear lady,whilst this machine is to him.
--Hamlet."
This, in obedience, hath mydaughter shown me.
But how hath she Received hislove?
What do you think of me?
As of a man faithful andhonourable.
I would fain prove so.
But what might you think,
When I had seen this hot love onthe wing--
As I perceived it, I must tellyou that,
Before my daughter told me--what might you,
Or my dear majesty your queenhere, think,
If I had play'd the desk ortable-book,
Or given my heart a winking,mute and dumb,
Or look'd upon this love withidle sight;
What might you think?
No, I went round to work,
And my young mistress thus I didbespeak:
"Lord Hamlet is a prince, out ofthy star;
This must not be."
And then I prescripts gave her,
That she should lock herselffrom his resort,
Admit no messengers, receive notokens.
Which done, she took the fruitsof my advice;
And he, repelled-- a short taleto make--
Fell into a sadness, then into afast,
Thence to a watch, thence into aweakness,
Thence into a lightness, and, bythis declension,
Into the madness wherein now heraves,
And all we mourn for.
Do you think 'tis this?
It may be, very likely.
Take this from this, if this beotherwise:
How may we try it further?
Ah, You know, sometimes he walksfour hours together
Here in the lobby.
At such a time I'll loose mydaughter to him:
Be you and I behind an arrasthen;
Mark the encounter:
if he love her not And be notfrom his reason fall'n thereon,
Let me be no assistant for astate,
But keep a farm and carters.
We will try it.
But look, where sadly the poorwretch comes reading.
Away, I do beseech you, bothaway:
I'll board him presently.
How does my good Lord Hamlet?
Well.
God have mercy.
Do you know me, my lord?
Excellent well.
Ah.
You are a fishmonger.
Not I, my lord.
Then I would you were so honesta man.
Honest, my lord!
Ay, sir; to be honest, as thisworld goes,
is to be one man picked out often thousand.
That's very true, my lord.
For if the sun breed maggots ina dead dog,
being a god kissing carrion--
Have you a daughter?
I have, my lord.
Let her not walk i' the sun:conception is a blessing:
but not as your daughter mayconceive.
Friend, look to it.
How say you by that? Stillharping on my daughter.
Yet he knew me not at first;said I was a fishmonger.
He is far gone, far gone: andyet truly in my youth
I suffered much extremity forlove;
very near this.
I'll speak to him again.
What do you read, my lord?
Words, words, words.
What is the matter, my lord?
Between who?
I mean, what is the matter thatyou read, my lord.
Slanders, sir: for the satiricalrogue says
here that old men have greybeards,
that their faces are wrinkled,
their eyes purging thick amberand plum-tree gum.
That they have a plentiful lackof wit,
together with most weak hams:
all which, sir, though I mostpowerfully and potently believe,
yet I hold it not honesty tohave it thus set down,
for you yourself, sir, shouldgrow old as I am,
if like a crab you could gobackward.
Though this be madness, yetthere is method in't.
I'll speak to him again.
My Lord, will you walk out o'the air?
Into my grave?
Indeed, that's out o' the air.
How pregnant sometimes hisreplies are!
My lord, I will take my leave ofyou.
You cannot, sir, take from me
any thing that I will morewillingly part withal:
except my life, except my life,except my life.
Fare you well, my lord.
These tedious old fools!
You go to seek the Lord Hamlet;there he is.
God save you, sir!
My honoured lord!
My most dear lord!
My excellent good friends!
How dost thou, Guildenstern?
Ah, Rosencrantz!
Good lads, how do ye both?
As the indifferent children ofthe earth.
Happy, in that we are notover-happy;
On fortune's cap we are not thevery button.
Nor the soles of her shoe?
Neither, my lord.
Then you live about her waist,in the middle of her favours?
'Faith, her privates we.
In the secret parts of fortune?
O, 'tis too true.
She is a strumpet.
What news?
None, my lord, but that theworld's grown honest.
Then is doomsday near: but yournews is not true.
Let me question more inparticular:
what have you, my good friends,
deserved at the hands offortune,
that she sends you to prisonhither?
Prison, my lord!
Denmark's a prison.
Then is the world one.
A goodly one;
in which there are manyconfines, wards and dungeons,
Denmark being one o' the worst.
We think not so, my lord.
Why, then, 'tis none to you;
for there is nothing either goodor bad,
but thinking makes it so: to meit is a prison.
Why then, your ambition makes itone;
'tis too narrow for your mind.
O God, I could be bounded in anut shell
and count myself a king ofinfinite space,
were it not that I have baddreams.
Which dreams indeed areambition,
for the very substance of theambitious
is merely the shadow of a dream.
A dream itself is but a shadow.
Shall we to the court?
For, by my fay, I cannot reason.
We'll wait upon you.
No such matter:
I will not sort you with therest of my servants,
for, to speak to you like anhonest man,
I am most dreadfully attended.
But, in the beaten way offriendship,
what make you at Elsinore?
To visit you, my lord; no otheroccasion.
Beggar that I am, I am even poorin thanks;
but I thank you: and sure, dearfriends,
my thanks are too dear ahalfpenny.
Were you not sent for?
Is it your own inclining?
Is it a free visitation?
Come, come; deal justly with me.
Come; nay, speak.
What should we say, my lord?
Why, any thing, but to thepurpose.
You were sent for;
and there is a kind ofconfession in your looks
which your modesties have notcraft enough to colour:
I know the good king and queenhave sent for you.
To what end, my lord?
That you must teach me.
But let me conjure you by therights of our fellowship
and by the obligation of ourever-preserved love,
be even and direct with mewhether you were sent for or no.
What say you?
Nay, then I have an eye of you.
If you love me, hold nothing.
My lord, we were sent for.
I will tell you why.
So shall my anticipation preventyour discovery,
and your secrecy to the king andqueen moult no feather.
I have of late-- but wherefore Iknow not--
lost all my mirth, forgone allcustom of exercises;
and indeed it goes so heavilywith my disposition
that this goodly frame, theearth,
seems to me a sterilepromontory,
this most excellent canopy, theair, look you,
this brave o'erhangingfirmament,
this majestical roof frettedwith golden fire,
why, it appears no other thingto me
than a foul and pestilentcongregation of vapours.
What a piece of work is a man.
How noble in reason,
How infinite in faculties.
In form and moving how expressand admirable.
In action how like an angel.
In apprehension how like a god.
The beauty of the world, theparagon of animals!
And yet, to me, what is thisquintessence of dust?
Man delights not me.
No, nor woman neither,
though by your smiling you seemto say so.
My lord, there was no such stuffin my thoughts.
Why did you laugh then,
when I said, "man delights notme"?
To think, my lord, if youdelight not in man,
what lenten entertainment theplayers shall receive from you:
we coted them on the way; andhither are they coming,
to offer you service.
He that plays the king shall bewelcome;
his majesty shall have tributeof me;
What players are they?
Even those that you were wont totake such delight in,
the tragedians of the city.
How chances it they travel?
Their residence, both inreputation and profit,
was better both ways.
I think their inhibition
comes by means of the lateinnovation.
Do they hold the same estimationthey did when I was in the city?
Are they so followed?
No, indeed, are they not.
How comes it? Do they growrusty?
No, their endeavour keeps in thewonted pace:
but there is, sir, an aery ofchildren,
little eyases, that cry out onthe top of question,
and are most tyrannicallyclapped for't.
These are now the fashion,
and so berattle the commonstages--
so they call them--
that many wearing rapiers areafraid of goose-quills
and dare scarce come thither.
What, are they children?
Who maintains 'em?
Will they pursue the quality nolonger than they can sing?
Will they not say,
when they shall grow themselvesto common players--
their writers do them wrong,
to make them exclaim againsttheir own succession?
'Faith, there has been much todo on both sides;
and the nation holds it no sinto tarre them to controversy:
It is not very strange; for myuncle is king of Denmark,
and those that would make mowsat him while my father lived
now give twenty, forty, fifty,an hundred ducats a-piece
for his picture in little.
'Sblood, there is something inthis more than natural,
if philosophy could find it out.
There are the players.
Gentlemen, you are welcome toElsinore.
Your hands, come then:
the appurtenance of welcome isfashion and ceremony:
let me comply with you in thisgarb.
You are welcome.
But my uncle-father andaunt-mother are deceived.
In what, my dear lord?
I am but mad north-north-west:
when the wind is southerly Iknow a hawk from a handsaw.
Well be with you, gentlemen!
Hark you, Guildenstern;
and you too: at each ear ahearer.
That great baby you see there
is not yet out of hisswaddling-clouts.
I will prophesy he comes to tellme of the players; mark it.
You say right, sir.
O' Monday morning; 'twas thenindeed.
My lord, I have news to tellyou.
When Roscius was an actor inRome--
The actors are come hither, mylord.
Buzz, buzz!
Upon mine honour,
Then came each actor on his ass.
The best actors in the world,
either for tragedy, comedy,history, pastoral,
pastoral-comical,historical-pastoral,
tragical-historical,
tragical-comical-historical-pastoral,
scene individable or poemunlimited.
Seneca cannot be too heavy orPlautus too light.
For the law of writ and theliberty,
these are the only men.
O Jephthah, judge of Israel,what a treasure hadst thou!
What a treasure had he, my lord?
Why, "One fair daughter and nomore,
The which he loved passingwell."
Still on my daughter.
Am I not i' the right, oldJephthah?
If you call me Jephthah, mylord,
I have a daughter that I lovepassing well.
Nay, that follows not.
What follows, then, my lord?
Why, "As by lot"--
God wot.
But look!
Where my abridgement comes.
Welcome, all.
I am glad to see thee well.
Welcome, good friends.
O, my old friend!
Why, thy face is valenced sinceI saw thee last.
Comest thou to beard me inDenmark?
What, my young lady andmistress!
By'r lady, your ladyship isnearer to heaven
than when I saw you last, by thealtitude of a chopine.
Pray God, your voice, likeapiece of uncurrent gold,
be not cracked within the ring.
Masters, you are all welcome.
We'll e'en to't like Frenchfalconers,
fly at any thing we see: we'llhave a speech straight.
Come, give us a taste of yourquality;
come, a passionate speech.
What speech, my good lord?
I heard thee speak me a speechonce,
but it was never acted; or, ifit was, not above once;
for the play, I remember,pleased not the million;
'twas caviare to the general.
One speech in it I chieflyloved:
'twas Aeneas' tale to Dido; andthereabout of it
especially, where he speaks ofPriam's slaughter:
if it live within your memory, Ipray you begin at this line.
Let me see, let me see--
"The rugged Pyrrhus, like theHyrcanian beast"--
No, 'tis not so.
It begins with Pyrrhus:
"The rugged Pyrrhus, he whosesable arms,
"Black as his purpose, did thenight resemble
"When he lay couched in theominous horse,
"Hath now this dread and blackcomplexion
"smear'd With heraldry moredismal;
"head to foot Now is he totalgules;
"roasted in wrath and fire,
"And thus o'er-sized withcoagulate gore,
"With eyes like carbuncles,
the hellish Pyrrhus Oldgrandsire Priam seeks."
So proceed you.
'Fore God, my lord, well spoken,
with good accent, gooddiscretion.
Anon he finds him Striking tooshort at Greeks;
his antique sword, Rebellious tohis arm,
lies where it falls, Repugnantto command:
unequal match'd, Pyrrhus atPriam drives;
in rage strikes wide;
But with the whiff and wind ofhis fell sword
The unnerved father falls.
Then senseless Ilium, Seeming tofeel this blow,
with flaming top Stoops to hisbase,
and with a hideous crash Takesprisoner Pyrrhus' ear.
This is too long.
It shall to the barber's withyour beard.
Prithee, say on: he's for a jigor a tale of bawdry,
or he sleeps: say on: come toHecuba.
But who, O, who had seen themobled queen--
The mobled queen?
That's good; "mobled queen" isgood.
Shh.
Run barefoot up and down,
threatening the flames Withbisson rheum;
a clout upon that head Wherelate the diadem stood,
and for a robe, About her lankand all o'er-teemed loins,
A blanket, in the alarm of fearcaught up; Who this had seen,
with tongue in venom steep'd,
'Gainst Fortune's state wouldtreason have pronounced.
But if the gods themselves didsee her then
When she saw Pyrrhus makemalicious sport
In mincing with his sword herhusband's limbs,
The instant burst of clamourthat she made,
Unless things mortal move themnot at all,
Would have made milch theburning eyes of heaven,
And passion in the gods.
Look, whether he has not turnedhis colour
and has tears in his eyes.
Prithee no more.
'Tis well.
I'll have thee speak out therest of this soon.
Good my lord, will you see theplayers well bestowed?
Do you hear, let them be wellused;
for they are the abstract andbrief chronicles of the time:
after your death you were betterhave a bad epitaph
than their ill report while youlive.
My lord, I shall use themaccording to their deserts.
God's bodykins, man, muchbetter.
Use every man after his desert,and who shall 'scape whipping?
Use them after your own honourand dignity:
the less they deserve,
the more merit is in yourbounty.
Take them in.
Come, sirs.
Follow him, friends: we'll heara play to-morrow.
Dost thou hear me, old friend;
can you play "The Murder ofGonzago?"
Ay, my lord.
We'll ha't to-morrow night.
You could, for a need,
study a speech of some dozen orsixteen lines,
which I would set down andinsert in't, could you not?
Ay, my lord.
Very well.
Follow that lord; and look youmock him not.
My good friends...
I'll leave you till night.
You are welcome to Elsinore.
Good my lord!
Ay, so.
God buy you.
Now I am alone.
O, what a rogue and peasantslave am I!
Is it not monstrous that thisplayer here,
But in a fiction, in a dream ofpassion,
Could force his soul so to hisown conceit
That from her working all hisvisage wann'd,
Tears in his eyes, distractionsin his aspect,
A broken voice, and his wholefunction
suiting With forms to hisconceit?
And all for nothing!
For Hecuba!
What's Hecuba to him, or he toHecuba,
That he should weep for her?
What would he do
Had he the motive and the cuefor passion That I have?
He would drown the stage withtears
And cleave the general ear withhorrid speech,
Make mad the guilty and appalthe free,
Confound the ignorant,
and amaze indeed The veryfaculties
of eyes and ears.
Yet I, A dull and muddy-mettledrascal,
peak, Like John-a-dreams,unpregnant of my cause,
And can say nothing; no, not fora king
Upon whose property and mostdear life
A damn'd defeat was made.
Am I a coward?
Who calls me villain?
Breaks my pate across?
Plucks off my beard and blows itin my face?
Tweaks me by the nose?
Gives me the lie i' the throatAs deep as to the lungs?
Who does me this?
Ha!
Ah, 'swounds, I should take it:
for it cannot be But I ampigeon-liver'd
and lack gall To make oppressionbitter,
or ere this I should have fattedall the region kites
With this slave's offal.
Bloody, bawdy villain!
Remorseless, treacherous,lecherous, kindless villain!
O, vengeance!
Why, what an ass am I!
This is most brave, That I, theson of a dear father murder'd,
Prompted to my revenge by heavenand hell,
Must, like a whore, unpack myheart with words,
And fall a-cursing, like a verydrab, A scullion!
Fie upon't!
Foh!
About my brain!
I have heard That guiltycreatures
sitting at a play Have by thevery cunning
of the scene Been struck so tothe soul
that presently They haveproclaim'd their malefactions;
For murder, though it have notongue,
will speak With most miraculousorgan.
I'll have these players Playsomething like the murder
of my father Before mine uncle.
I'll observe his looks; I'lltent him to the quick.
If he but blench, I know mycourse.
The spirit that I have seen Maybe a devil:
and the devil hath power Toassume a pleasing shape;
yea, and perhaps Out of myweakness and my melancholy,
As he is very potent with suchspirits,
Abuses me to damn me:
I'll have grounds More relativethan this.
The play's the thing
Wherein I'll catch theconscience of the king.